design-principles.md, before:

# Design Principles of Color Systems

## Colors Are Thematic Categories

Colors in color systems are mutually exclusive collections of themes. A given game entity goes in this bucket or that, or sometimes multiple buckets. Water is Blue, the sun is Yellow, and the beach is both.

## Color Systems Don't Require Color Words

Any mutually exclusive collections of themes can be viewed as a color system. The classical elements - Fire, Water, Earth, and Air - may as well be Red, Blue, Green, and Yellow. Just because Hearthstone calls their color classes and Elder Scrolls Legends calls them attributes, doesn't mean that they aren't examples of color systems.

## Colors Are Defined Through Entities

You define the color categories through the things you associate to them. Maybe in your game a boat is Blue because water is Blue, or maybe a boat is White because its sails are White, or maybe Brown because it's made of wood, or maybe Black because that's the color of a seafaring nation's flag in your game world. The category into which you place that entity makes a statement about that category.

## Colors Are Personal

Even children have favorite colors, and tastes and feelings about colors. Take care to represent a color holistically. Black is as much about luxury as it is about the night, and Fire is as much about cooking as it is about destruction.

## Colors Are Cultural

Consider your target audiences and the other themes of your game when associating colors with themes. In Thailand, Yellow is the color of the emperor. In China, Red is the color of the emperor, and Metal is one of the elements. Color philosophies, and other thematic categories, are not universals.

## Colors Are Amoral

It is an unfortunate cultural carryover that we Westerners associate black with evil and white with good, or Fire with being malicious while Water and Nature are peaceful. There is a wholesome serenity in the night, and there are tumultuous seas. Every color has the capacity for good and evil. Associating these topics with particular colors does a disservice to all the others.

## Choose Color Names Wisely

Color names echo through the rest of your design space. Even subtle distinctions in names can have meaningful ramifications. There is a world of connotative difference between Gray and Silver, or Water and Ocean.

## Treat Colors Equally

Players have favorites, and want to see their favorites get equal treatment. If you add a color to a system, you should be prepared to give it just as much love as you've given to your other colors.

Sometimes there is a reason to treat a category as more rare than others. Try to find ways to make it feel special without making it feel lacking.

## Monocolor Matters Most

Only monocolor entities capture pure essences of a color, expressing characteristics of the color unambiguously. Without a sufficient number of monocolor entities, players will struggle to understand the colors and the color system as a whole. For each color, try to have at least as many monocolor entities as there are multicolor entities which feature that color. If there are ten multicolor items that feature Red, then there should be at least ten mono-Red items as well.

Commit message:

docs: expand on color names & unique first letters

design-principles.md, after:

# Design Principles of Color Systems

## Colors Are Thematic Categories

Colors in color systems are mutually exclusive collections of themes. A given game entity goes in this bucket or that, or sometimes multiple buckets. Water is Blue, the sun is Yellow, and the beach is both.

## Color Systems Don't Require Color Words

Any mutually exclusive collections of themes can be viewed as a color system. The classical elements - Fire, Water, Earth, and Air - may as well be Red, Blue, Green, and Yellow. Just because Hearthstone calls their color classes and Elder Scrolls Legends calls them attributes, doesn't mean that they aren't examples of color systems.

## Colors Are Defined Through Entities

You define the color categories through the things you associate to them. Maybe in your game a boat is Blue because water is Blue, or maybe a boat is White because its sails are White, or maybe Brown because it's made of wood, or maybe Black because that's the color of a seafaring nation's flag in your game world. The category into which you place that entity makes a statement about that category.

## Colors Are Personal

Even children have favorite colors, and tastes and feelings about colors. Take care to represent a color holistically. Black is as much about luxury as it is about the night, and Fire is as much about cooking as it is about destruction.

## Colors Are Cultural

Consider your target audiences and the other themes of your game when associating colors with themes. In Thailand, Yellow is the color of the emperor. In China, Red is the color of the emperor, and Metal is one of the elements. Color philosophies, and other thematic categories, are not universals.

## Colors Are Amoral

It is an unfortunate cultural carryover that we Westerners associate black with evil and white with good, or Fire with being malicious while Water and Nature are peaceful. There is a wholesome serenity in the night, and there are tumultuous seas. Every color has the capacity for good and evil. Associating these topics with particular colors does a disservice to all the others.

## Choose Color Names Wisely

Color names echo through the rest of your design space. Even subtle distinctions in names can have meaningful ramifications. There is a world of connotative difference between Gray and Silver, or Water and Ocean.

There is a special benefit to each color name starting with a different letter. It allows you to succinctly represent colors and color combinations, which is helpful in documentation, design, and development.

## Treat Colors Equally

Players have favorites, and want to see their favorites get equal treatment. If you add a color to a system, you should be prepared to give it just as much love as you've given to your other colors.

Sometimes there is a reason to treat a category as more rare than others. Try to find ways to make it feel special without making it feel lacking.

## Monocolor Matters Most

Only monocolor entities capture pure essences of a color, expressing characteristics of the color unambiguously. Without a sufficient number of monocolor entities, players will struggle to understand the colors and the color system as a whole. For each color, try to have at least as many monocolor entities as there are multicolor entities which feature that color. If there are ten multicolor items that feature Red, then there should be at least ten mono-Red items as well.
